---
layout: page
title: About Araldika
permalink: /about/
image: /assets/img/identity/home.webp

---

Welcome to **Araldika**, your comprehensive resource for exploring the
rich and vibrant world of heraldry in Malta. Whether you are a seasoned
heraldic scholar or a curious enthusiast, our website offers a wealth of
information and tools to deepen your understanding of this fascinating
tradition. Araldika features a **general armory**, an **ordinary of
crests**, an **ordinary of arms**, and a **directory of mottoes**,
making it a one-stop destination for all things heraldic.

Heraldry in Malta has a storied history that reflects the island’s
strategic significance in the Mediterranean and its cultural evolution
under various rulers. From the arrival of the Knights Hospitaller in
1530, who brought with them the iconic Maltese Cross, to the modern era,
Malta's heraldic tradition has been a symbol of identity and authority.
The coats of arms and crests found across Malta’s architecture,
manuscripts, and art are testament to this rich heritage.

In recent years, the importance of heraldry in Malta has been further
recognized with the establishment of the **Office of the Chief Herald of
Malta** in 2019. This office, under the leadership of Dr. Charles A.
Gauci, has revitalized heraldic practice in Malta by granting new coats
of arms, conducting heraldic research, and educating the public about
the significance of these symbols. The Chief Herald's work ensures that
Malta's heraldic traditions are preserved and respected, bridging the
gap between historical practices and contemporary relevance.

Araldika's [general armory](/general-armory) is a meticulously curated
collection of coats of arms, representing the diversity and depth of
heraldic symbols used throughout Maltese history. Each entry in the
armory provides detailed descriptions, blazoning, and historical
context, allowing users to explore the visual and symbolic language of
heraldry.

Our [ordinary of crests](/ordinary-of-crests) and [ordinary of
arms](/ordinary-of-arms) offer a structured approach to heraldic
research. An *ordinary* is a classification system that organizes crests
and arms by their elements, such as charges, colors, and arrangements.
This allows users to identify and compare heraldic symbols based on
their characteristics, making it easier to trace connections and
understand the development of heraldic art in Malta.

Finally, the [directory of mottoes](/mottoes) is an extensive
compilation of the phrases and maxims associated with coats of arms.
Mottoes often encapsulate the values and aspirations of the individuals
or families they represent, and our directory provides insights into the
meanings and origins of these important heraldic components.

Whether you are researching your own family history, studying Maltese
heraldry, or simply exploring the world of symbols and emblems, Araldika
is here to support your journey. We invite you to explore our
collections, engage with the history, and discover the stories behind
the arms, crests, and mottoes that have shaped Malta’s identity.
