---
layout: page
title: A Brief History of Maltese Heraldry
permalink: /history/
image: /assets/img/identity/home.webp
---

Heraldry in Malta is a vivid reflection of the island's unique
historical journey, shaped by its strategic location in the
Mediterranean and the various powers that have ruled over it throughout
the centuries. From the ancient traditions of the Knights Hospitaller to
the modern practices under the Office of the Chief Herald, Maltese
heraldry offers a rich tapestry of symbols and stories that continue to
resonate today.

## The Knights Hospitaller (1530–1798)

The practice of heraldry in Malta began in earnest with the arrival of
the **Knights Hospitaller** in 1530. The Knights, also known as the
Order of St. John, were granted Malta by Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor,
as a sovereign state after they were expelled from Rhodes. They brought
with them a sophisticated heraldic tradition that quickly became woven
into the fabric of Maltese society. Each Grand Master, knight, and
prominent figure within the Order bore a personal coat of arms, many of
which are still visible today in the architecture, churches, and
historical records of Malta.

One of the most iconic symbols to emerge from this period is the
**Maltese Cross**. This eight-pointed cross, representing the eight
obligations or aspirations of the Knights, became synonymous with Malta
itself. It was not only a symbol of the Knights’ commitment to the
Christian faith but also a representation of their role as defenders of
Europe against Ottoman expansion. The Maltese Cross continues to be a
powerful emblem of Maltese identity and heritage, recognized around the
world.

The coats of arms used by the Knights were often rich in symbolism,
featuring elements that reflected their noble lineage, their vows, and
their connection to the Order. These arms were prominently displayed on
the buildings of the knights' residences, known as **Auberges**, and on
the fortifications they constructed to defend the island. This period
established a heraldic legacy that would influence Maltese culture for
centuries.

## The British Period (1800–1964)

The next significant chapter in Maltese heraldry began with the arrival
of the **British Empire** in 1800. Malta became a British protectorate,
and later a crown colony, following the expulsion of the French. During
this period, new heraldic symbols were introduced that reflected Malta's
changing political status and the island's role within the British
Empire.

One of the most significant heraldic developments during the British
period was the granting of the **George Cross** to Malta in 1942 by King
George VI. This honor was awarded in recognition of the extraordinary
bravery and resilience of the Maltese people during the relentless
bombing campaigns of World War II. The George Cross was incorporated
into Malta’s coat of arms in 1943, and it remains a prominent feature on
the national flag today, symbolizing Malta's courage and sacrifice
during the war.

The British period also saw the introduction of various other heraldic
elements that were associated with British rule, including coats of arms
for colonial governors and other officials. These symbols often blended
British and Maltese elements, reflecting the dual heritage of the island
during this time.

## Post-Independence Heraldry (1964–Present)

Following Malta's independence in 1964, there was a renewed effort to
create national symbols that reflected both the island’s rich history
and its new status as a sovereign nation. The coat of arms adopted in
1964 featured traditional Maltese symbols, including a mural crown and a
shield bearing the Maltese Cross, but it was redesigned in 1975 and
again in 1988 to reflect changing national sentiments and aesthetics.

The current coat of arms, adopted in 1988, features a shield that
displays the national flag, with a mural crown representing the
fortifications of Malta and an olive branch and palm frond symbolizing
peace. This design integrates elements from Malta's heraldic past while
also looking forward to its future.

## The Chief Herald of Malta (2019–Present)

The establishment of the **Office of the Chief Herald of Malta** in 2019
marked a significant milestone in the island's heraldic history. This
office was created to oversee and regulate heraldic practices in Malta,
ensuring that the rich traditions of the past are preserved and adapted
to the needs of the present. The Chief Herald, Dr. Charles A. Gauci, is
responsible for granting new coats of arms, registering existing ones,
and promoting heraldic education and research.

Under Dr. Gauci’s leadership, the Office of the Chief Herald has played
a crucial role in revitalizing heraldic practices in Malta. This
includes not only the formal recognition and granting of arms but also
the documentation and preservation of historical heraldic records. The
office has also engaged in outreach and education, helping to raise
awareness of the importance of heraldry as a part of Malta's cultural
heritage.

The creation of this office reflects a broader recognition of the
importance of heraldry in Malta's national identity. By formalizing and
regulating the use of heraldic symbols, the Chief Herald ensures that
these traditions continue to be respected and that they remain relevant
in a modern context.

## Araldika

At **Araldika**, we are proud to contribute to the ongoing tradition of
heraldry in Malta. Our platform provides a space where the history and
practice of Maltese heraldry can be explored, studied, and appreciated.
Through our **general armory**, **ordinaries**, and **directory of
mottoes**, we aim to make the rich tapestry of Maltese heraldry
accessible to everyone, from scholars to enthusiasts.

Heraldry in Malta is more than just a collection of symbols; it is a
reflection of the island's identity, history, and values. By exploring
these symbols, we gain a deeper understanding of the forces that have
shaped Malta and the people who have called it home. Whether you are
researching your own family history, studying the history of the Knights
Hospitaller, or simply curious about the stories behind the symbols,
Araldika is here to support your journey into the world of Maltese
heraldry.
